Hello and welcome back. In this video we're going to be looking at how to get our
enemies to shoot back at us. So we've got
this little game, where we can shoot
down the enemies, and let's remind
ourselves what that looks like. That's the
game right here. If I press play, I can
then shoot the enemies down with
repeated application of a laser beam, but
what I want is not for this direction to
work but I want the other direction to
work. I want the Inverse to work. I want to be
in danger. I want the enemies to shoot at
me at a particular frequency. So let's
say I want the enemies to shoot at me at three shots per second, or something like that.
And I want that, and that's the aim of this video; getting the enemies to shoot back. In
addition, I want to make sure that the
enemy beams... the enemy
projectiles don't collide with each
other and other don't collide with other
enemies. So I don't want an enemy in the
back shooting an enemy in the front and
doing our job for us. That's too easy, so
we'll sort out that later in the video,
when we look at stopping collisions in a
controlled fashion. So where do we start
for all this? Well, in fact, you're going
to start. You're going to get the enemies
to shoot at the player to begin with. So
the first thing I want you to do is, in the
same way we got the player shooting
whenever he presses the
spacebar, whenever the space bar is
pressed, we get a projectile firing. In
the same manner, I want you to get the
enemy's firing a projectile, and I want
you to fire a projectile on every update. And
once you've got that going make sure
that whatever the projectile hits the
player, we log out a message to the
console, to make sure we've got the
collision detected properly. In addition
if you have a little bit more time and
you fancy a little bit of a
challenge, try and tune the
script so that the frequency of firing
is determined by a particular variable.
So you can change and tune the fire
frequency, using Time.deltaTime and Random.value in your script.
So pause the video now, and get those
enemies firing. I will see you very
shortly. So how did it go?
Here's how I would do it. So let's jump into our game. The first thing I'm going to need is a
projectile, for my enemies to fire, and to
do that i'm going to copy the player
projectile. So I've got a projectile here called player laser in my player
entities. I'm going to duplicate it. I'm going to use Command + D to duplicate it. I think you can use Control
+ D on Windows? Or you can use the menu, it has a duplicate in there. Now, I'm going to rename
this guy to be EnemyLaser, and once I've got this enemy laser here, I'm going to
bring it over to my Enemy folder. And in my enemy behavior script, I'm going to edit my enemy behavior
script. I'm going to create a new slot
for my prefab, which is going to be
public. And it's going to be GameObject
projectile. And that we can jump back
into our Unity and drag and drop the prefab
across, in our enemy prefabs. We've got the enemy
prefab here. In there, we're going to find the
enemy behavior component, and we can see
there's a missing slot. Now, there's an
empty slot, which is for the projectile,
and the projectile I'm going to drag over the
enemy laser component,
prefab, into the slot on the enemy
behavior script. And now, we've got access
to this enemy laser. So what do I want to
do next?
Well next up, I want to spawn it on every
update. So let's jump into our code again,
and we've got no update function, so let's create it straight away. We create a new
update function, so that would be void
Update(){}, and in there I'm going to firstly
Instantiate my prefab. So I just use Instantiate, and give it the
projectile, and we are done. So that's going to Instantiate a projectile
on every update. So what happens if I
press play now? Well, let's jump back and try
it. We can see that they spawn and all of the projectiles get created in 000,
the middle of the game space. So we don't
want that. They're being spawned in the
wrong place. So our next job is to spawn
them in the right place. So we jump  back.
We've got this projectile here. Where do
we spawn them?
Well, we give them our position, which is
going to be transform.position
So that's the position of the actual enemy. So that's the enemy behavior script, which
is attached to an enemy prefab which is going to turn into enemies in the scene. So
that's the position of the enemies. And then, in addition, I don't want any
rotation, so I'm going to give it a Quaternion
identity for the rotation. I
can mess around with sprites and their orientation separately. You
already know how to do that. You've got
all the tools in hand, this is just to show
you how to get the laser going. So now,
I've got this thing that should now be
spawned in the right place. So let's try again. If we press the play button, what happens now?
Well, they kind of pop on the screen and
disappear. And why is that?
Well, that's because they are spawning
under or on top of the enemies themselves. And
what happens when a projectile is on
top of an enemy? Well, they hit each other,
they collide, and they explode and the enemies go bye-bye. So that's not what we want.
So what do we do for that? We've got some
cool techniques coming up next, coming up
later in the video to kind of improve on what we're going to do here. But we're going to kind
of fudge it a little bit, by simply giving
it a little offset to its position. So
instead of the transform.position we're
going to create a Vector3, which is
going to be a start position. So startPosition, that's going to be the
transform.position plus a little
offset. So I add the transform.position
here. That's going to be my start position. Here we go. And I want to add an offset, and
my offset is going to be a new Vector3
And I don't want any offset in the
X direction; I want 0.0 here. In the Y
direction, I want them to be below the
actual ship, so that's going to be lets say -0.1. I believe that
should be enough. We can check that
later. In fact, let's go 1 to make sure we've
got enough, and 0 in the Z. I don't want them to be
any further away from the camera, any
further away from the screen than they already are.
Now. that's the right position. So I saved that. Now, we should find that they are spawned
below the ships. So let's jump back into
our game and press play. Yep! And they are indeed
spawned below the ships. So what are we
not doing here? What are we forgetting?
Well, we're not adding any velocity to
our projectiles. They're just being spawned
in thin air, but they're not moving. So let's stop the game, jump back, and add some
velocity. So how are we going to add our
velocity? Well, we need to get hold of the
projectile itself, the missile, and we can
do that by grabbing what is
returned from Instantiate. So we do
GameObject, and that's what we want to
manipulate. So we do GameObject, and this will
come out of the Instantiate. We're going to
call it
missile. And remember that Instantiate returns an object and not a GameObject. So
we need to tell Instantiate we're
expecting a GameObject. We say here well...
What we're saying is, essentially, I know what I'm doing. I know what I'm expecting. I know
how to handle this object you're returning, and I know it's a GameObject. And
now once we've to get the missile, we can add a little bit of velocity to it. So we can do
missile.rigidbody2D.velocity and we can set that to equal a new... and we can use
Vector2(), because it's a 2D rigidbody2D. We could
use Vector3 and set Z at 0, but we can also use Vector2 here. We can say new Vector2. We don't
any velocity in the Z direction that's
side to side. We do want some velocity
in the Y direction. Now, how are we going
to handle that? We want that to be
tunable and changeable, so we're going to create a public float variable,
which we can tune in the Inspector,
called projectileSpeed.
And that's going to be... Just make sure my capitalization is right. That's going to
be set to 10 as default,  and in
the Vector2, we're going to add that as
projectile speed. Now, if you're clever
you will notice there's a little problem
here. What's going on? Can you see the
problem or not? If you can't see the
problem, it'll be very obvious when we jump
back into our game. If we just jump back
into our game, you will see that when I
press play, they just disappear straight
away. So what's going on here? Let's watch that again. I press play, they do pop up on screen, with
a couple of projectiles, and then they disappear.
Well, have you found what the problem is
yet? The problem is that the velocity is
currently pointing upwards, so the missiles,
you're spawning them in front of you,
and they're coming straight back and
blowing you up. Not what we want, so we add
a minus sign to our projectile speed, to
tell the vector that we are actually
pointing downwards. The velocity of the
projectile is going down towards the
player. So let's save that. Let's see what
happens.
Control Save... Control S... Command S, go back into Unity and press play. Awesome!
And we now have projectiles being fired from our enemies. A lot of projectiles
right now, in fact. So what do we want to do next? Well, next I'm going to be
looking at making sure that the enemy itself, the player rather...
the player in the scene can actually
receive those projectiles, because right
now, there's no message being logged to the console when we collide with an enemy
projectile. So how are we going to do that. Well, I need to add a bunch of components. The first
one is going to be Physics2D. I'm going to
want a PolygonCollider, and you can see
it appears straight away on the screen.
And it's created a PolygonCollider for
us. And you can see that the PolygonCollider follows the outline of the shape
of the sprite. It's not a box collider. It's a little bit more expensive,
computationally expensive, but for the
player I think that makes more sense,
because we don't want to accidentally hit a
missile, and you can optimize that and make it
really neat, if you want. I think that's
good enough, just to show you the general
one. If you want to modify the collider
what you can do, is once you've got the object selected you can create
the Edit Collider, and this will let you
edit the various pieces of the collider.
Now, you'll notice that I'm doing this on the
player itself. I'm not doing this on the
prefab. So once I've got the collider here, I
will need to apply that to my prefab.
However, my prefab, if I look at my player
prefab, I do not want to be applying my
transform. So lets reset that to 0. Here we go. So you'll see the polygon collider coming up here in my
prefab as well. So back into the player. I
don't just want a polygon collider, I also
want a Rigidbody2D. And I can add this
as a component as well in Physics2D
Rigidbody2D. So brilliant, I'd leave the
masses, it's fine. I'm going to put 0 angular drag,
0 gravity scale fixed angle. Definitely I want to control the angle, and
it is kinematic. That means I'm
controlling it, I'm sorting out its
movement. So brilliant! We've now got the
collider on there, which will allow us to
detect the incoming enemy missiles. The
Rigidbody is not strictly necessary to
do this, but it is always a really good
habit that when you're adding a polygon
collider or any kind of collider, on a
moving object, it ought to have a rigid body. And the
reason for that is how the Unity engine works. You need that Rigidbody to do
efficient calculations of the physics in the background. It doesn't matter too
much, it's just a really good habit to get
into. It would work if you
forgot it. Though we're just going put it in
there anyway, just to get into the good
habits. So now we've got this polygon
collider. We need to kind of do something when we're
hit by a missile. So let's take a look at
what happens when the enemy is hit by
missile. So we take a look at the enemy
behavior, and we can see that OnTriggerEnter2D
when we grab a collider, if it's
a projectile, then we deal some damage to
ourselves. And that's exactly what we're
going to do for our players. So let me
copy that code across, open, in fact,
the player script for the player controller,
and I'm going to add a new function, which
is going to be below my update. I'm going to
add... not here just below my update... add a new OnTriggerEnter2D. And we're missing the health.
Obviously health no longer exists here, so we're going to create a new public health
variable, right here. So we're going to
public float health, and we're going to
give it a health of say 250 hit points to
begin. So now it has a health, everything
looks good here, and the player should be destroyed, as soon as it gets
hit by a missile. Now, we still haven't really
solved the problem. We've already stepped
a little bit further ahead than we were
planning. We're not logging out anything
here. So just to show you that it works
and we can log stuff out, I'm going to add a
log statement here that's going to log out to the console, whenever we get a collision
with a missile. So ("Player collided with missile"); and in fact a disposition
doesn't, this would be any collision, so
let me put it in the missile. Here we go
if we jump back into our game now, and I
press play, I should... What did we
forget to do? There's something
fundamental we forgot to do. That's a
very strange, wonderful, and beautiful effect, but not quite what we're looking for. It's
in my player, if you look at the player
prefab, this we forgot to take the Is
Trigger. We want the projectiles to be
able to enter the player... the enemy
projectiles to be able to enter the player,
but we can't right now, there's no OnColission.
We've used a trigger instead, so we click Is
Trigger, and then, we should get the
behavior you want. So now the enemy projectiles do you kill us.
Wonderful! So what's next?
Well, next up is getting us to tune the
frequency of how fast the enemy shoots. So
how are we going to do that? Well, to do that let's take a look at our approach. The
approach to tuning the frequency is to
say, what's the probability of firing in
a given frame? ... in this frame. And if we given the
probability of firing fire if appropriate. So the firing probability
depends on two things; it depends on the
time elapsed and the intended frequency.
And they relate to each other, because
the probability of firing is the time
elapsed times the frequency. So let's
imagine some examples. Let's say we have a
frequency of 0, which means we never fire.
Well, the probability because the frequency is 0 is always going to be 0,
so we always have a 0 probability of fire. What about if the time elapsed to 0? If we've not
had any time span, what's the probability of
firing, given a 0 no time has been
passed? While the probability of firing, if there's no time, is 0. So those two work if we put the
frequency of the time elapsed to 0 to give
us the right result. What about if the
time elapsed is 1 and the frequency, let's say is 0.5? So a frequency of 0.5 means that every second I
fire half a shot; I fire one shot
every two seconds. So if the time is 1 and
the frequency is 0.5 what's the
probability that I'm going to fire a
shot this frame or this time interval? Well, that's half 0.5. What
about if my time is 2? What's
probably of firing given my frequency is
0.5? Well, 2 times 0.5, that's 2 divided by 2, and that's just 1. So the
probability of firing, given a 2 second
interval, is going to be 1, we're going
to be firing. What about if we have a
longer interval? Lets say we have 4. Let's say we have
a time of 4 and a frequency of 0.5
Well, we do 4 times 0.5 and
that's 2. The probability of firing this frame is 2. That's great, that means we should
fire; we should have fired twice in the time elapsed. So that's how we
calculate that probability. And then I'll
show you how to use Random.value to
fire, given a probability. So let's
get to it! Let's jump in! I want to look
at my enemy controller, and in my enemy
controller I want to... in enemy
behavior rather, I want to enable that
probabilistic firing that I talked about.
So the first thing I do is I remove the
stuff from inside update, and I'm going to
pull it out into it's own fire function. Now, the fire function is there just the same way we
had it in the player controller and in
the update. And then, I'm going to call my
fire function from update. So how about all
this probability stuff? Well, we start
with the basis, the first foundation, which is our firing frequency;
that's shots per second. So I want to
create a public float variable called
shotsPerSeconds and that's going to be
the frequency at which I fire, or roughly
the frequency I intend to fire at. Now, I've
got this frequency here. I can do let's
say 0.5, and don't forget the f to say it's a float variable, and now I can
calculate the probability of fire. So I
can do
float probability is. And remember the
equation we talked about? The probability
of firing is the shots per second
times the time interval, so the time
interval is Time.deltaTime, and the
frequency is shots per second. So now, we've got a probability that we should be
firing. So how do we get from a
probability to actually making a decision?
Well, we're going to use the if statement
and Random.value. So if you remember Random.value
is between 0 and 1. And so what we're going to do is do Random.value
is less than the probability. Because Random.value
is homogeneous it's as likely to get 0.1 as you are to
get 0.5 as you are to get 0.9, from Random.value, because that's flat. The distribution is flat. When we've
got a probability of say 0.8, we are going to get this, if condition is
going to be true,
basically 80% of the time,
and that's exactly the behavior we want. So note that this is a general case to
turn a probability into a decision. You can
simply say Random.value less than the
probability. Now, the criteria for this is that the probability has to be between 0 and 100,
as probabilities have to be. In this particular case, we could technically have a very
long frame, so the update could take a
really long time. And we could have
a frame thats like 3 seconds long, and that would mean our probability is very high.
Now, you'd have to deal with this
particular case, sensibly, if you were
to use this technique elsewhere, but in
our case we can essentially consider a
probability of 5.6 to mean we want to be
firing this frame. We don't want repeated
shots per frame, so in a given frame, we are now going to be firing twice; we only ever
want to be firing once. So that sufficiently
good for us, right now. So now we have
something that will let our enemies fire
end times per second. So let's save it and
try it. So we jump back into our game, press pause, press play again, and see what
happens. And we are indeed firing roughly
once every two seconds, and you see it's
kind of random It's not perfectly once
every two seconds. It's not regular, its
randomly, roughly at once every two
seconds,
not precisely. So cool! Now, we've got this
going. Let's try and fire back, and we'll
see if we get some problems. If we jump back, the problem is that... now we've
added a collider to our player. We are
spawning the player's projectiles on top
of the player, their colliding with the
player, and the player is dying. So we can
change that by changing the player controller script to when we
create our projectiles, in the fire
function. We're also going to add a
little offset to the the actual laser. So
we can do that by going Vector3
offset and creating a new Vector3 that's going to be 0 in the
X direction, 1 in the Y direction, and 0 in the Z direction, and we can just add the
offset to the position. Here we go!
And after we jump back, you'll notice that
when I press play and when I press the
spacebar, the projectiles from the player
are actually spawned above the player
not on top. Now, we've still got one thing
left to do and that is to make sure we
have a second shredder in our scene, so that we don't end up with lots and lots of
fires from the enemies staying in
the scene. So how are we going to do that?
Well, that's really quite simple. We're just going to grab the first shredder, and we're going
to duplicate it. And I've got the first shredder now... the second shredder
now here, and if I select it I can drag it
below my player and that will catch my enemy
fire, so that they don't keep living forever.
And then, if I press play and let the enemies
shoot, when you move out of the way,
you'll see that only a few enemy lasers
stick around during the scene. They don't
accumulate here smashing. For this video I
think we've done enough, so far, it's been
long enough.
Congratulations for getting here! You now
have a tunable frequency for the enemy
fire. I hope you've enjoyed this video,
and that you can do this for your own
game. And I will see you in another video!
Bye for now.